6.11.2013

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

L 294/1

I
(Legislative acts)

DIRECTIVES
DIRECTIVE 2013/48/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
of 22 October 2013
on the right of access to a lawyer in criminal proceedings and in European arrest warrant
proceedings, and on the right to have a third party informed upon deprivation of liberty and to
communicate with third persons and with consular authorities while deprived of liberty
necessary approximation of legislation would facilitate
cooperation between competent authorities and the
judicial protection of individual rights.

THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE
EUROPEAN UNION,

Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union, and in particular point (b) of Article 82(2) thereof,
Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission,

(3)

Pursuant to Article 82(1) of the Treaty on the Func­
tioning of the European Union (TFEU), ‘judicial
cooperation in criminal matters in the Union shall be
based on the principle of mutual recognition of
judgments and judicial decisions…’.

(4)

The implementation of the principle of mutual recog­
nition of decisions in criminal matters presupposes that
Member States trust in each other’s criminal justice
systems. The extent of the mutual recognition is very
much dependent on a number of parameters, which
include mechanisms for safeguarding the rights of
suspects or accused persons and common minimum
standards necessary to facilitate the application of the
principle of mutual recognition.

(5)

Although the Member States are party to the ECHR and
to the ICCPR, experience has shown that that alone does
not always provide a sufficient degree of trust in the
criminal justice systems of other Member States.

(6)

Mutual recognition of decisions in criminal matters can
operate effectively only in a spirit of trust in which not
only judicial authorities, but all actors in the criminal
process consider decisions of the judicial authorities of
other Member States as equivalent to their own, implying
not only trust in the adequacy of other Member States’
rules, but also trust that those rules are correctly applied.
Strengthening mutual trust requires detailed rules on the
protection of the procedural rights and guarantees arising
from the Charter, the ECHR and the ICCPR. It also
requires, by means of this Directive and by means of
other measures, further development within the Union
of the minimum standards set out in the Charter and
in the ECHR.

After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national
parliaments,
Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and
Social Committee (1),
After consulting the Committee of the Regions,
Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure (2),
Whereas:
(1)

(2)

Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union (the Charter), Article 6 of the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms (the ECHR) and Article 14 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(the ICCPR) enshrine the right to a fair trial. Article 48(2)
of the Charter guarantees respect for the rights of the
defence.
The Union has set itself the objective of maintaining and
developing an area of freedom, security and justice.
According to the Presidency conclusions of the
European Council in Tampere of 15 and 16 October
1999, and in particular point (33) thereof, the principle
of mutual recognition of judgments and other decisions
of judicial authorities should become the cornerstone of
judicial cooperation in civil and criminal matters within
the Union because enhanced mutual recognition and the

(1) OJ C 43, 15.2.2012, p. 51.
(2) Position of the European Parliament of 10 September 2013 (not yet
published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of
7 October 2013.

L 294/2

(7)

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Article 82(2) TFEU provides for the establishment of
minimum rules applicable in the Member States so as
to facilitate mutual recognition of judgments and
judicial decisions and police and judicial cooperation in
criminal matters having a cross-border dimension. That
Article refers to ‘the rights of individuals in criminal
procedure’ as one of the areas in which minimum rules
may be established.

(8)

Common minimum rules should lead to increased
confidence in the criminal justice systems of all
Member States, which, in turn, should lead to more
efficient judicial cooperation in a climate of mutual
trust and to the promotion of a fundamental rights
culture in the Union. Such common minimum rules
should also remove obstacles to the free movement of
citizens throughout the territory of the Member States.
Such common minimum rules should be established in
relation to the right of access to a lawyer in criminal
proceedings, the right to have a third party informed
upon deprivation of liberty and the right to communicate
with third persons and with consular authorities while
deprived of liberty.

(9)

On 30 November 2009, the Council adopted a
Resolution on a Roadmap for strengthening the
procedural rights of suspected or accused persons in
criminal proceedings (‘the Roadmap’) (1). Taking a stepby-step approach, the Roadmap calls for the adoption of
measures regarding the right to translation and interpre­
tation (measure A), the right to information on rights
and information about the charges (measure B), the
right to legal advice and legal aid (measure C), the
right to communicate with relatives, employers and
consular authorities (measure D), and special safeguards
for suspects or accused persons who are vulnerable
(measure E). The Roadmap emphasises that the order
of the rights is only indicative and thus implies that it
may be changed in accordance with priorities. The
Roadmap is designed to operate as a whole; only when
all its components are implemented will its benefits be
felt in full.

(10)

(11)

On 11 December 2009, the European Council welcomed
the Roadmap and made it part of the Stockholm
programme — An open and secure Europe serving and
protecting citizens (2) (point 2.4). The European Council
underlined the non-exhaustive character of the Roadmap,
by inviting the Commission to examine further elements
of minimum procedural rights for suspects and accused
persons, and to assess whether other issues, for instance
the presumption of innocence, need to be addressed, in
order to promote better cooperation in that area.
Two measures have been adopted pursuant to the
Roadmap to date, namely Directive 2010/64/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 20 October
2010 on the right to interpretation and translation in
criminal proceedings (3) and Directive 2012/13/EU of

(1) OJ C 295, 4.12.2009, p. 1.
(2) OJ C 115, 4.5.2010, p. 1.
(3) OJ L 280, 26.10.2010, p. 1.

6.11.2013

the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May
2012 on the right to information in criminal proceed­
ings (4).
(12)

This Directive lays down minimum rules concerning the
right of access to a lawyer in criminal proceedings and in
proceedings for the execution of a European arrest
warrant pursuant to Council Framework Decision
2002/584/JHA of 13 June 2002 on the European
arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between
Member States (5) (European arrest warrant proceedings)
and the right to have a third party informed upon depri­
vation of liberty and to communicate with third persons
and with consular authorities while deprived of liberty. In
doing so, it promotes the application of the Charter, in
particular Articles 4, 6, 7, 47 and 48 thereof, by building
upon Articles 3, 5, 6 and 8 ECHR, as interpreted by the
European Court of Human Rights, which, in its case-law,
on an ongoing basis, sets standards on the right of access
to a lawyer. That case-law provides, inter alia, that the
fairness of proceedings requires that a suspect or accused
person be able to obtain the whole range of services
specifically associated with legal assistance. In that
regard, the lawyers of suspects or accused persons
should be able to secure without restriction, the funda­
mental aspects of the defence.

(13)

Without prejudice to the obligations of Member States
under the ECHR to ensure the right to a fair trial,
proceedings in relation to minor offending which take
place within a prison and proceedings in relation to
offences committed in a military context which are
dealt with by a commanding officer should not be
considered to be criminal proceedings for the purposes
of this Directive.

(14)

This Directive should be implemented taking into
account the provisions of Directive 2012/13/EU, which
provide that suspects or accused persons are provided
promptly with information concerning the right of
access to a lawyer, and that suspects or accused
persons who are arrested or detained are provided
promptly with a written Letter of Rights containing
information about the right of access to a lawyer.

(15)

The term ‘lawyer’ in this Directive refers to any person
who, in accordance with national law, is qualified and
entitled, including by means of accreditation by an auth­
orised body, to provide legal advice and assistance to
suspects or accused persons.

(16)

In some Member States an authority other than a court
having jurisdiction in criminal matters has competence
for imposing sanctions other than deprivation of liberty
in relation to relatively minor offences. That may be the
case, for example, in relation to traffic offences which are
committed on a large scale and which might be estab­
lished following a traffic control. In such situations, it
would be unreasonable to require that the competent

(4) OJ L 142, 1.6.2012, p. 1.
(5) OJ L 190, 18.7.2002, p. 1.

6.11.2013

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

authorities ensure all the rights under this Directive.
Where the law of a Member State provides for the
imposition of a sanction regarding minor offences by
such an authority and there is either a right of appeal
or the possibility for the case to be otherwise referred to
a court having jurisdiction in criminal matters, this
Directive should therefore apply only to the proceedings
before that court following such an appeal or referral.

(17)

In some Member States certain minor offences, in
particular minor traffic offences, minor offences in
relation to general municipal regulations and minor
public order offences, are considered to be criminal
offences. In such situations, it would be unreasonable
to require that the competent authorities ensure all the
rights under this Directive. Where the law of a Member
State provides in respect of minor offences that depri­
vation of liberty cannot be imposed as a sanction, this
Directive should therefore apply only to the proceedings
before a court having jurisdiction in criminal matters.

(18)

The scope of application of this Directive in respect of
certain minor offences should not affect the obligations
of Member States under the ECHR to ensure the right to
a fair trial including obtaining legal assistance from a
lawyer.

(19)

Member States should ensure that suspects or accused
persons have the right of access to a lawyer without
undue delay in accordance with this Directive. In any
event, suspects or accused persons should be granted
access to a lawyer during criminal proceedings before a
court, if they have not waived that right.

(20)

For the purposes of this Directive, questioning does not
include preliminary questioning by the police or by
another law enforcement authority the purpose of
which is to identify the person concerned, to verify the
possession of weapons or other similar safety issues or to
determine whether an investigation should be started, for
example in the course of a road-side check, or during
regular random checks when a suspect or accused person
has not yet been identified.

(21)

Where a person other than a suspect or accused person,
such as a witness, becomes a suspect or accused person,
that person should be protected against self-incrimination
and has the right to remain silent, as confirmed by the
case-law of the European Court of Human Rights. This
Directive therefore makes express reference to the
practical situation where such a person becomes a
suspect or accused person during questioning by the
police or by another law enforcement authority in the
context of criminal proceedings. Where, in the course of
such questioning, a person other than a suspect or
accused person becomes a suspect or accused person,

L 294/3

questioning should be suspended immediately. However,
questioning may be continued if the person concerned
has been made aware that he or she is a suspect or
accused person and is able to fully exercise the rights
provided for in this Directive.

(22)

Suspects or accused persons should have the right to
meet in private with the lawyer representing them.
Member States may make practical arrangements
concerning the duration and frequency of such
meetings, taking into account the circumstances of the
proceedings, in particular the complexity of the case and
the procedural steps applicable. Member States may also
make practical arrangements to ensure safety and
security, in particular of the lawyer and of the suspect
or accused person, in the place where such a meeting is
conducted. Such practical arrangements should not
prejudice the effective exercise or essence of the right
of suspects or accused persons to meet their lawyer.

(23)

Suspects or accused persons should have the right to
communicate with the lawyer representing them. Such
communication may take place at any stage, including
before any exercise of the right to meet that lawyer.
Member States may make practical arrangements
concerning the duration, frequency and means of such
communication, including concerning the use of video­
conferencing and other communication technology in
order to allow such communications to take place.
Such practical arrangements should not prejudice the
effective exercise or essence of the right of suspects or
accused persons to communicate with their lawyer.

(24)

In respect of certain minor offences, this Directive should
not prevent Member States from organising the right of
suspects or accused persons to have access to a lawyer by
telephone. However, limiting the right in this way should
be restricted to cases where a suspect or accused person
will not be questioned by the police or by another law
enforcement authority.

(25)

Member States should ensure that suspects or accused
persons have the right for their lawyer to be present
and participate effectively when they are questioned by
the police or by another law enforcement or judicial
authority, including during court hearings. Such partici­
pation should be in accordance with any procedures
under national law which may regulate the participation
of a lawyer during questioning of the suspect or accused
person by the police or by another law enforcement or
judicial authority, including during court hearings,
provided that such procedures do not prejudice the
effective exercise and essence of the right concerned.
During questioning by the police or by another law

L 294/4

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

arrange for the assistance of a lawyer on the basis of a
list of available lawyers from which the suspect or
accused person could choose. Such arrangements could
include those on legal aid if applicable.

enforcement or judicial authority of the suspect or
accused person or in a court hearing, the lawyer may,
inter alia, in accordance with such procedures, ask ques­
tions, request clarification and make statements, which
should be recorded in accordance with national law.

(26)

(27)

(28)

Suspects or accused persons have the right for their
lawyer to attend investigative or evidence-gathering
acts, insofar as they are provided for in the national
law concerned and in so far as the suspects or accused
persons are required or permitted to attend. Such acts
should at least include identity parades, at which the
suspect or accused person figures among other persons
in order to be identified by a victim or witness; confron­
tations, where a suspect or accused person is brought
together with one or more witnesses or victims where
there is disagreement between them on important facts
or issues; and reconstructions of the scene of a crime in
the presence of the suspect or accused person, in order
to better understand the manner and circumstances
under which a crime was committed and to be able to
ask specific questions to the suspect or accused person.
Member States may make practical arrangements
concerning the presence of a lawyer during investigative
or evidence-gathering acts. Such practical arrangements
should not prejudice the effective exercise and essence of
the rights concerned. Where the lawyer is present during
an investigative or evidence-gathering act, this should be
noted using the recording procedure in accordance with
the law of the Member State concerned.

Member States should endeavour to make general
information available, for instance on a website or by
means of a leaflet that is available at police stations, to
facilitate the obtaining of a lawyer by suspects or accused
persons. However, Member States would not need to take
active steps to ensure that suspects or accused persons
who are not deprived of liberty will be assisted by a
lawyer if they have not themselves arranged to be
assisted by a lawyer. The suspect or accused person
concerned should be able freely to contact, consult and
be assisted by a lawyer.

Where suspects or accused persons are deprived of
liberty, Member States should make the necessary
arrangements to ensure that such persons are in a
position to exercise effectively the right of access to a
lawyer, including by arranging for the assistance of a
lawyer when the person concerned does not have one,
unless they have waived that right. Such arrangements
could imply, inter alia, that the competent authorities

6.11.2013

(29)

The conditions in which suspects or accused persons are
deprived of liberty should fully respect the standards set
out in the ECHR, in the Charter, and in the case-law of
the Court of Justice of the European Union (the Court of
Justice) and of the European Court of Human Rights.
When providing assistance under this Directive to a
suspect or to an accused person who is deprived of
liberty, the lawyer concerned should be able to raise a
question with the competent authorities regarding the
conditions in which that person is deprived of liberty.

(30)

In cases of geographical remoteness of the suspect or
accused person, such as in overseas territories or where
the Member State undertakes or participates in military
operations outside its territory, Member States are
permitted to derogate temporarily from the right of the
suspect or accused person to have access to a lawyer
without undue delay after deprivation of liberty. During
such a temporary derogation, the competent authorities
should not question the person concerned or carry out
any of the investigative or evidence-gathering acts
provided for in this Directive. Where immediate access
to a lawyer is not possible because of the geographical
remoteness of the suspect or accused person, Member
States should arrange for communication via telephone
or video conference unless this is impossible.

(31)

Member States should be permitted to derogate
temporarily from the right of access to a lawyer in the
pre-trial phase when there is a need, in cases of urgency,
to avert serious adverse consequences for the life, liberty
or physical integrity of a person. During a temporary
derogation on that ground, the competent authorities
may question suspects or accused persons without the
lawyer being present, provided that they have been
informed of their right to remain silent and can
exercise that right, and provided that such questioning
does not prejudice the rights of the defence, including the
privilege against self-incrimination. Questioning may be
carried out for the sole purpose and to the extent
necessary to obtain information that is essential to
avert serious adverse consequences for the life, liberty
or physical integrity of a person. Any abuse of this
derogation would in principle irretrievably prejudice the
rights of the defence.

6.11.2013

(32)

(33)

(34)

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Member States should also be permitted to derogate
temporarily from the right of access to a lawyer in the
pre-trial phase where immediate action by the investi­
gating authorities is imperative to prevent substantial
jeopardy to criminal proceedings, in particular to
prevent destruction or alteration of essential evidence,
or to prevent interference with witnesses. During a
temporary derogation on that ground, the competent
authorities may question suspects or accused persons
without a lawyer being present, provided that they
have been informed of their right to remain silent and
can exercise that right, and provided that such ques­
tioning does not prejudice the rights of the defence,
including the privilege against self-incrimination. Ques­
tioning may be carried out for the sole purpose and to
the extent necessary to obtain information that is
essential to prevent substantial jeopardy to criminal
proceedings. Any abuse of this derogation would in
principle irretrievably prejudice the rights of the defence.

Confidentiality of communication between suspects or
accused persons and their lawyer is key to ensuring the
effective exercise of the rights of the defence and is an
essential part of the right to a fair trial. Member States
should therefore respect the confidentiality of meetings
and other forms of communication between the lawyer
and the suspect or accused person in the exercise of the
right of access to a lawyer provided for in this Directive,
without derogation. This Directive is without prejudice to
procedures that address the situation where there are
objective and factual circumstances giving rise to the
suspicion that the lawyer is involved with the suspect
or accused person in a criminal offence. Any criminal
activity on the part of a lawyer should not be considered
to be legitimate assistance to suspects or accused persons
within the framework of this Directive. The obligation to
respect confidentiality not only implies that Member
States should refrain from interfering with or accessing
such communication but also that, where suspects or
accused persons are deprived of liberty or otherwise
find themselves in a place under the control of the
State, Member States should ensure that arrangements
for communication uphold and protect confidentiality.
This is without prejudice to any mechanisms that are
in place in detention facilities with the purpose of
avoiding illicit enclosures being sent to detainees, such
as screening correspondence, provided that such mech­
anisms do not allow the competent authorities to read
the communication between suspects or accused persons
and their lawyer. This Directive is also without prejudice
to procedures under national law according to which
forwarding correspondence may be rejected if the
sender does not agree to the correspondence first being
submitted to a competent court.

This Directive should be without prejudice to a breach of
confidentiality which is incidental to a lawful surveillance

L 294/5

operation by competent authorities. This Directive should
also be without prejudice to the work that is carried out,
for example, by national intelligence services to safeguard
national security in accordance with Article 4(2) of the
Treaty on European Union (TEU) or that falls within the
scope of Article 72 TFEU, pursuant to which Title V on
an area of Freedom, Security and Justice must not affect
the exercise of the responsibilities incumbent upon
Member States with regard to the maintenance of law
and order and the safeguarding of internal security.

(35)

Suspects or accused persons who are deprived of liberty
should have the right to have at least one person, such as
a relative or an employer, nominated by them, informed
of their deprivation of liberty without undue delay,
provided that this does not prejudice the due course of
the criminal proceedings against the person concerned or
any other criminal proceedings. Member States may
make practical arrangements in relation to the appli­
cation of that right. Such practical arrangements should
not prejudice the effective exercise and essence of the
right. In limited, exceptional circumstances, however, it
should be possible to derogate temporarily from that
right when this is justified, in the light of the particular
circumstances of the case, by a compelling reason as
specified in this Directive. When the competent auth­
orities envisage making such a temporary derogation in
respect of a specific third person, they should firstly
consider whether another third person, nominated by
the suspect or accused person, could be informed of
the deprivation of liberty.

(36)

Suspects or accused persons should, while deprived of
liberty, have the right to communicate without undue
delay with at least one third person, such as a relative,
nominated by them. Member States may limit or defer
the exercise of that right in view of imperative
requirements or proportionate operational requirements.
Such requirements could include, inter alia, the need to
avert serious adverse consequences for the life, liberty or
physical integrity of a person, the need to prevent
prejudice to criminal proceedings, the need to prevent
a criminal offence, the need to await a court hearing,
and the need to protect victims of crime. When the
competent authorities envisage limiting or deferring the
exercise of the right to communicate in respect of a
specific third person, they should first consider whether
the suspects or accused persons could communicate with
another third person nominated by them. Member States
may make practical arrangements concerning the timing,
means, duration and frequency of communication with
third persons, taking account of the need to maintain
good order, safety and security in the place where the
person is being deprived of liberty.

L 294/6

(37)

(38)

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

that lawyer may, inter alia, in accordance with procedures
provided for under national law, ask questions, request
clarification and make statements. The fact that the
lawyer has participated in such a hearing should be
noted using the recording procedure in accordance
with the law of the Member State concerned.

The right of suspects and accused persons who are
deprived of liberty to consular assistance is enshrined
in Article 36 of the 1963 Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations where it is a right conferred on
States to have access to their nationals. This Directive
confers a corresponding right on suspects or accused
persons who are deprived of liberty, subject to their
wishes. Consular protection may be exercised by
diplomatic authorities where such authorities act as
consular authorities.
(43)

Requested persons should have the right to meet in
private with the lawyer representing them in the
executing Member State. Member States may make
practical arrangements concerning the duration and
frequency of such meetings, taking into account the
particular circumstances of the case. Member States
may also make practical arrangements to ensure safety
and security, in particular of the lawyer and of the
requested person, in the place where the meeting
between the lawyer and the requested person is
conducted. Such practical arrangements should not
prejudice the effective exercise and essence of the right
of requested persons to meet with their lawyer.

(44)

Requested persons should have the right to communicate
with the lawyer representing them in the executing
Member State. It should be possible for such communi­
cation to take place at any stage, including before any
exercise of the right to meet with the lawyer. Member
States may make practical arrangements concerning the
duration, frequency and means of communication
between requested persons and their lawyer, including
concerning the use of videoconferencing and other
communication technology in order to allow such
communications to take place. Such practical
arrangements should not prejudice the effective exercise
and essence of the right of requested persons to
communicate with their lawyer.

(45)

Executing Member States should make the necessary
arrangements to ensure that requested persons are in a
position to exercise effectively their right of access to a
lawyer in the executing Member State, including by
arranging for the assistance of a lawyer when requested
persons do not have one, unless they have waived that
right. Such arrangements, including those on legal aid if
applicable, should be governed by national law. They
could imply, inter alia, that the competent authorities
arrange for the assistance of a lawyer on the basis of a
list of available lawyers from which requested persons
could choose.

(46)

Without undue delay after being informed that a
requested person wishes to appoint a lawyer in the
issuing Member State, the competent authority of that
Member State should provide the requested person with

Member States should clearly set out in their national law
the grounds and criteria for any temporary derogations
from the rights granted under this Directive, and they
should make restricted use of those temporary deroga­
tions. Any such temporary derogations should be
proportional, should be strictly limited in time, should
not be based exclusively on the type or the seriousness of
the alleged offence, and should not prejudice the overall
fairness of the proceedings. Member States should ensure
that where a temporary derogation has been authorised
under this Directive by a judicial authority which is not a
judge or a court, the decision on authorising the
temporary derogation can be assessed by a court, at
least during the trial stage.

(39)

Suspects or accused persons should be able to waive a
right granted under this Directive provided that they have
been given information about the content of the right
concerned and the possible consequences of waiving that
right. When providing such information, the specific
conditions of the suspects or accused persons
concerned should be taken into account, including their
age and their mental and physical condition.

(40)

A waiver and the circumstances in which it was given
should be noted using the recording procedure in
accordance with the law of the Member State concerned.
This should not lead to any additional obligation for
Member States to introduce new mechanisms or to any
additional administrative burden.

(41)

Where a suspect or accused person revokes a waiver in
accordance with this Directive, it should not be necessary
to proceed again with questioning or any procedural acts
that have been carried out during the period when the
right concerned was waived.

(42)

Persons subject to a European arrest warrant (‘requested
persons’) should have the right of access to a lawyer in
the executing Member State in order to allow them to
exercise their rights effectively under Framework Decision
2002/584/JHA. Where a lawyer participates in a hearing
of a requested person by an executing judicial authority,

6.11.2013

6.11.2013

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

information to facilitate the appointment of a lawyer in
that Member State. Such information could, for example,
include a current list of lawyers, or the name of a lawyer
on duty in the issuing State, who can provide
information and advice in European arrest warrant
cases. Member States could request that the appropriate
bar association draw up such a list.

(47)

(48)

(49)

(50)

The surrender procedure is crucial for cooperation in
criminal matters between the Member States. Observance
of the time-limits contained in Framework Decision
2002/584/JHA is essential for such cooperation.
Therefore, while requested persons should be able to
exercise fully their rights under this Directive in
European arrest warrant proceedings, those time-limits
should be respected.

(51)

The duty of care towards suspects or accused persons
who are in a potentially weak position underpins a fair
administration of justice. The prosecution, law
enforcement and judicial authorities should therefore
facilitate the effective exercise by such persons of the
rights provided for in this Directive, for example by
taking into account any potential vulnerability that
affects their ability to exercise the right of access to a
lawyer and to have a third party informed upon depri­
vation of liberty, and by taking appropriate steps to
ensure those rights are guaranteed.

(52)

This Directive upholds the fundamental rights and prin­
ciples recognised by the Charter, including the
prohibition of torture and inhuman and degrading
treatment, the right to liberty and security, respect for
private and family life, the right to the integrity of the
person, the rights of the child, integration of persons
with disabilities, the right to an effective remedy and
the right to a fair trial, the presumption of innocence
and the rights of the defence. This Directive should be
implemented in accordance with those rights and prin­
ciples.

(53)

Member States should ensure that the provisions of this
Directive, where they correspond to rights guaranteed by
the ECHR, are implemented consistently with those of
the ECHR and as developed by case-law of the
European Court of Human Rights.

(54)

This Directive sets minimum rules. Member States may
extend the rights set out in this Directive in order to
provide a higher level of protection. Such higher level
of protection should not constitute an obstacle to the
mutual recognition of judicial decisions that those
minimum rules are designed to facilitate. The level of
protection should never fall below the standards
provided by the Charter or by the ECHR, as interpreted
by the case-law of the Court of Justice and of the
European Court of Human Rights.

(55)

This Directive promotes the rights of children and takes
into account the Guidelines of the Council of Europe on
child friendly justice, in particular its provisions on
information and advice to be given to children. This
Directive ensures that suspects and accused persons,
including children, are provided with adequate
information to understand the consequences of waiving
a right under this Directive and that any such waiver is
made voluntarily and unequivocally. Where the suspect
or accused person is a child, the holder of parental
responsibility should be notified as soon as possible
after the child’s deprivation of liberty and should be
provided with the reasons therefor. If providing such
information to the holder of parental responsibility is
contrary to the best interests of the child, another
suitable adult such as a relative should be informed
instead. This should be without prejudice to provisions

Pending a legislative act of the Union on legal aid,
Member States should apply their national law in
relation to legal aid, which should be in line with the
Charter, the ECHR and the case-law of the European
Court of Human Rights.

In accordance with the principle of effectiveness of
Union law, Member States should put in place
adequate and effective remedies to protect the rights
that are conferred upon individuals by this Directive.

Member States should ensure that in the assessment of
statements made by suspects or accused persons or of
evidence obtained in breach of their right to a lawyer, or
in cases where a derogation from that right was auth­
orised in accordance with this Directive, the rights of the
defence and the fairness of the proceedings are respected.
In this context, regard should be had to the case-law of
the European Court of Human Rights, which has estab­
lished that the rights of the defence will, in principle, be
irretrievably prejudiced when incriminating statements
made during police interrogation without access to a
lawyer are used for a conviction. This should be
without prejudice to the use of statements for other
purposes permitted under national law, such as the
need to execute urgent investigative acts to avoid the
perpetration of other offences or serious adverse
consequences for any person or related to an urgent
need to prevent substantial jeopardy to criminal
proceedings where access to a lawyer or delaying the
investigation would irretrievably prejudice the ongoing
investigations regarding a serious crime. Further, this
should be without prejudice to national rules or
systems regarding admissibility of evidence, and should
not prevent Member States from maintaining a system
whereby all existing evidence can be adduced before a
court or a judge, without there being any separate or
prior assessment as to admissibility of such evidence.

L 294/7

L 294/8

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

of national law which require that any specified auth­
orities, institutions or individuals, in particular those
that are responsible for the protection or welfare of
children, should be informed of the deprivation of
liberty of a child. Member States should refrain from
limiting or deferring the exercise of the right to
communicate with a third party in respect of suspects
or accused persons who are children and who are
deprived of liberty, save in the most exceptional circum­
stances. Where a deferral is applied the child should,
however, not be held incommunicado and should be
permitted to communicate, for example with an insti­
tution or an individual responsible for the protection
or welfare of children.

(56)

(57)

(58)

(59)

In accordance with the Joint Political Declaration of
28 September 2011 of Member States and the
Commission on explanatory documents (1), Member
States have undertaken to accompany, in justified cases,
the notification of their transposition measures with one
or more documents explaining the relationship between
the components of a directive and the corresponding
parts of national transposition instruments. With regard
to this Directive, the legislator considers the transmission
of such documents to be justified.

Since the objectives of this Directive, namely setting
common minimum rules for the right of access to a
lawyer in criminal proceedings and in European arrest
warrant proceedings and the right to have a third
person informed of the deprivation of liberty and to
communicate with third persons and with consular auth­
orities while deprived of liberty, cannot be sufficiently
achieved by the Member States, but can rather, by
reason of the scale of the measure, be better achieved
at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in
accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out
in Article 5 TEU. In accordance with the principle of
proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Directive
does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve
those objectives.

In accordance with Articles 1 and 2 of Protocol No 21
on the position of the United Kingdom and Ireland in
respect of the Area of Freedom, Security and Justice,
annexed to the TEU and to the TFEU and without
prejudice to Article 4 of that Protocol, those Member
States are not taking part in the adoption of this
Directive and are not bound by it or subject to its appli­
cation.

In accordance with Articles 1 and 2 of Protocol No 22
on the position of Denmark, annexed to the TEU and to
the TFEU, Denmark is not taking part in the adoption of
this Directive, and is not bound by it or subject to its
application,

(1) OJ C 369, 17.12.2011, p. 14.

6.11.2013

HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:

Article 1
Subject matter
This Directive lays down minimum rules concerning the rights
of suspects and accused persons in criminal proceedings and of
persons subject to proceedings pursuant to Framework Decision
2002/584/JHA (‘European arrest warrant proceedings’) to have
access to a lawyer, to have a third party informed of the depri­
vation of liberty and to communicate with third persons and
with consular authorities while deprived of liberty.

Article 2
Scope
1.
This Directive applies to suspects or accused persons in
criminal proceedings from the time when they are made aware
by the competent authorities of a Member State, by official
notification or otherwise, that they are suspected or accused
of having committed a criminal offence, and irrespective of
whether they are deprived of liberty. It applies until the
conclusion of the proceedings, which is understood to mean
the final determination of the question whether the suspect or
accused person has committed the offence, including, where
applicable, sentencing and the resolution of any appeal.

2.
This Directive applies to persons subject to European
arrest warrant proceedings (requested persons) from the time
of their arrest in the executing Member State in accordance
with Article 10.

3.
This Directive also applies, under the same conditions as
provided for in paragraph 1, to persons other than suspects or
accused persons who, in the course of questioning by the police
or by another law enforcement authority, become suspects or
accused persons.

4.
Without prejudice to the right to a fair trial, in respect of
minor offences:

(a) where the law of a Member State provides for the
imposition of a sanction by an authority other than a
court having jurisdiction in criminal matters, and the
imposition of such a sanction may be appealed or
referred to such a court; or

(b) where deprivation of liberty cannot be imposed as a
sanction;

this Directive shall only apply to the proceedings before a court
having jurisdiction in criminal matters.

6.11.2013

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

In any event, this Directive shall fully apply where the suspect
or accused person is deprived of liberty, irrespective of the stage
of the criminal proceedings.
Article 3
The right of access to a lawyer in criminal proceedings

L 294/9

(i) identity parades;
(ii) confrontations;
(iii) reconstructions of the scene of a crime.

1.
Member States shall ensure that suspects and accused
persons have the right of access to a lawyer in such time and
in such a manner so as to allow the persons concerned to
exercise their rights of defence practically and effectively.

4.
Member States shall endeavour to make general
information available to facilitate the obtaining of a lawyer by
suspects or accused persons.

2.
Suspects or accused persons shall have access to a lawyer
without undue delay. In any event, suspects or accused persons
shall have access to a lawyer from whichever of the following
points in time is the earliest:

Notwithstanding provisions of national law concerning the
mandatory presence of a lawyer, Member States shall make
the necessary arrangements to ensure that suspects or accused
persons who are deprived of liberty are in a position to exercise
effectively their right of access to a lawyer, unless they have
waived that right in accordance with Article 9.

(a) before they are questioned by the police or by another law
enforcement or judicial authority;
(b) upon the carrying out by investigating or other competent
authorities of an investigative or other evidence-gathering
act in accordance with point (c) of paragraph 3;
(c) without undue delay after deprivation of liberty;
(d) where they have been summoned to appear before a court
having jurisdiction in criminal matters, in due time before
they appear before that court.
3.

The right of access to a lawyer shall entail the following:

(a) Member States shall ensure that suspects or accused persons
have the right to meet in private and communicate with the
lawyer representing them, including prior to questioning by
the police or by another law enforcement or judicial auth­
ority;
(b) Member States shall ensure that suspects or accused persons
have the right for their lawyer to be present and participate
effectively when questioned. Such participation shall be in
accordance with procedures under national law, provided
that such procedures do not prejudice the effective
exercise and essence of the right concerned. Where a
lawyer participates during questioning, the fact that such
participation has taken place shall be noted using the
recording procedure in accordance with the law of the
Member State concerned;
(c) Member States shall ensure that suspects or accused persons
shall have, as a minimum, the right for their lawyer to
attend the following investigative or evidence-gathering
acts where those acts are provided for under national law
and if the suspect or accused person is required or
permitted to attend the act concerned:

5.
In exceptional circumstances and only at the pre-trial
stage, Member States may temporarily derogate from the appli­
cation of point (c) of paragraph 2 where the geographical
remoteness of a suspect or accused person makes it impossible
to ensure the right of access to a lawyer without undue delay
after deprivation of liberty.
6.
In exceptional circumstances and only at the pre-trial
stage, Member States may temporarily derogate from the appli­
cation of the rights provided for in paragraph 3 to the extent
justified in the light of the particular circumstances of the case,
on the basis of one of the following compelling reasons:
(a) where there is an urgent need to avert serious adverse
consequences for the life, liberty or physical integrity of a
person;
(b) where immediate action by the investigating authorities is
imperative to prevent substantial jeopardy to criminal
proceedings.
Article 4
Confidentiality
Member States shall respect the confidentiality of communi­
cation between suspects or accused persons and their lawyer
in the exercise of the right of access to a lawyer provided for
under this Directive. Such communication shall include
meetings, correspondence, telephone conversations and other
forms of communication permitted under national law.
Article 5
The right to have a third person informed of the
deprivation of liberty
1.
Member States shall ensure that suspects or accused
persons who are deprived of liberty have the right to have at
least one person, such as a relative or an employer, nominated
by them, informed of their deprivation of liberty without undue
delay if they so wish.

L 294/10

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

2.
If the suspect or accused person is a child, Member States
shall ensure that the holder of parental responsibility of the
child is informed as soon as possible of the deprivation of
liberty and of the reasons pertaining thereto, unless it would
be contrary to the best interests of the child, in which case
another appropriate adult shall be informed. For the purposes
of this paragraph, a person below the age of 18 years shall be
considered to be a child.

3.
Member States may
cation of the rights set
justified in the light of
case on the basis of one

temporarily derogate from the appli­
out in paragraphs 1 and 2 where
the particular circumstances of the
of the following compelling reasons:

6.11.2013

2.
Suspects or accused persons also have the right to be
visited by their consular authorities, the right to converse and
correspond with them and the right to have legal representation
arranged for by their consular authorities, subject to the
agreement of those authorities and the wishes of the suspects
or accused persons concerned.

3.
The exercise of the rights laid down in this Article may be
regulated by national law or procedures, provided that such law
or procedures enable full effect to be given to the purposes for
which these rights are intended.

Article 8
General conditions for applying temporary derogations

(a) where there is an urgent need to avert serious adverse
consequences for the life, liberty or physical integrity of a
person;

1.
Any temporary derogation under Article 3(5) or (6) or
under Article 5(3) shall

(a) be proportionate and not go beyond what is necessary;
(b) where there is an urgent need to prevent a situation where
criminal proceedings could be substantially jeopardised.
(b) be strictly limited in time;
4.
Where Member States temporarily derogate from the
application of the right set out in paragraph 2, they shall
ensure that an authority responsible for the protection or
welfare of children is informed without undue delay of the
deprivation of liberty of the child.

(c) not be based exclusively on the type or the seriousness of
the alleged offence; and

(d) not prejudice the overall fairness of the proceedings.
Article 6
The right to communicate, while deprived of liberty, with
third persons
1.
Member States shall ensure that suspects or accused
persons who are deprived of liberty have the right to
communicate without undue delay with at least one third
person, such as a relative, nominated by them.

2.
Temporary derogations under Article 3(5) or (6) may be
authorised only by a duly reasoned decision taken on a case-bycase basis, either by a judicial authority, or by another
competent authority on condition that the decision can be
submitted to judicial review. The duly reasoned decision shall
be recorded using the recording procedure in accordance with
the law of the Member State concerned.

2.
Member States may limit or defer the exercise of the right
referred to in paragraph 1 in view of imperative requirements or
proportionate operational requirements.

3.
Temporary derogations under Article 5(3) may be auth­
orised only on a case-by-case basis, either by a judicial auth­
ority, or by another competent authority on condition that the
decision can be submitted to judicial review.

Article 7

Article 9

The right to communicate with consular authorities

Waiver

1.
Member States shall ensure that suspects or accused
persons who are non-nationals and who are deprived of
liberty have the right to have the consular authorities of their
State of nationality informed of the deprivation of liberty
without undue delay and to communicate with those auth­
orities, if they so wish. However, where suspects or accused
persons have two or more nationalities, they may choose
which consular authorities, if any, are to be informed of the
deprivation of liberty and with whom they wish to
communicate.

1.
Without prejudice to national law requiring the
mandatory presence or assistance of a lawyer, Member States
shall ensure that, in relation to any waiver of a right referred to
in Articles 3 and 10:

(a) the suspect or accused person has been provided, orally or
in writing, with clear and sufficient information in simple
and understandable language about the content of the right
concerned and the possible consequences of waiving it; and

6.11.2013

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

(b) the waiver is given voluntarily and unequivocally.
2.
The waiver, which can be made in writing or orally, shall
be noted, as well as the circumstances under which the waiver
was given, using the recording procedure in accordance with the
law of the Member State concerned.
3.
Member States shall ensure that suspects or accused
persons may revoke a waiver subsequently at any point
during the criminal proceedings and that they are informed
about that possibility. Such a revocation shall have effect
from the moment it is made.

L 294/11

authority in the issuing Member State. The competent authority
of that Member State shall, without undue delay, provide the
requested persons with information to facilitate them in
appointing a lawyer there.
6.
The right of a requested person to appoint a lawyer in the
issuing Member State is without prejudice to the time-limits set
out in Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA or the obligation on
the executing judicial authority to decide, within those timelimits and the conditions defined under that Framework
Decision, whether the person is to be surrendered.
Article 11

Article 10

Legal aid

The right of access to a lawyer in European arrest warrant
proceedings

This Directive is without prejudice to national law in relation to
legal aid, which shall apply in accordance with the Charter and
the ECHR.

1.
Member States shall ensure that a requested person has
the right of access to a lawyer in the executing Member State
upon arrest pursuant to the European arrest warrant.
2.
With regard to the content of the right of access to a
lawyer in the executing Member State, requested persons shall
have the following rights in that Member State:
(a) the right of access to a lawyer in such time and in such a
manner as to allow the requested persons to exercise their
rights effectively and in any event without undue delay from
deprivation of liberty;
(b) the right to meet and communicate with the lawyer repre­
senting them;
(c) the right for their lawyer to be present and, in accordance
with procedures in national law, participate during a hearing
of a requested person by the executing judicial authority.
Where a lawyer participates during the hearing this shall be
noted using the recording procedure in accordance with the
law of the Member State concerned.
3.
The rights provided for in Articles 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, and,
where a temporary derogation under Article 5(3) is applied,
in Article 8, shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to European arrest
warrant proceedings in the executing Member State.
4.
The competent authority in the executing Member State
shall, without undue delay after deprivation of liberty, inform
requested persons that they have the right to appoint a lawyer
in the issuing Member State. The role of that lawyer in the
issuing Member State is to assist the lawyer in the executing
Member State by providing that lawyer with information and
advice with a view to the effective exercise of the rights of
requested persons under Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA.

Article 12
Remedies
1.
Member States shall ensure that suspects or accused
persons in criminal proceedings, as well as requested persons
in European arrest warrant proceedings, have an effective
remedy under national law in the event of a breach of the
rights under this Directive.
2.
Without prejudice to national rules and systems on the
admissibility of evidence, Member States shall ensure that, in
criminal proceedings, in the assessment of statements made by
suspects or accused persons or of evidence obtained in breach
of their right to a lawyer or in cases where a derogation to this
right was authorised in accordance with Article 3(6), the rights
of the defence and the fairness of the proceedings are respected.
Article 13
Vulnerable persons
Member States shall ensure that the particular needs of
vulnerable suspects and vulnerable accused persons are taken
into account in the application of this Directive.
Article 14
Non-regression clause
Nothing in this Directive shall be construed as limiting or
derogating from any of the rights and procedural safeguards
that are ensured under the Charter, the ECHR, or other
relevant provisions of international law or the law of any
Member State which provides a higher level of protection.
Article 15
Transposition

5.
Where requested persons wish to exercise the right to
appoint a lawyer in the issuing Member State and do not
already have such a lawyer, the competent authority in the
executing Member State shall promptly inform the competent

1.
Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations
and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this
Directive by 27 November 2016. They shall immediately
inform the Commission thereof.

L 294/12

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

2.
When Member States adopt those measures, they shall
contain a reference to this Directive or shall be accompanied
by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication.
The methods of making such a reference shall be laid down by
the Member States.
3.
Member States shall communicate to the Commission the
text of the measures of national law which they adopt in the
field covered by this Directive.
Article 16
Report
The Commission shall, by 28 November 2019, submit a report
to the European Parliament and to the Council, assessing the
extent to which the Member States have taken the necessary
measures in order to comply with this Directive, including an
evaluation of the application of Article 3(6) in conjunction with
Article 8(1) and (2), accompanied, if necessary, by legislative
proposals.

6.11.2013

Article 17
Entry into force
This Directive shall enter into force on the twentieth day
following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the
European Union.
Article 18
Addressees
This Directive is addressed to the Member States in accordance
with the Treaties.

Done at Strasbourg, 22 October 2013.

For the European Parliament
The President

For the Council
The President

M. SCHULZ

V. LEŠKEVIČIUS

